Hi, my name is Brian Caffo, and this is
the lecture on managing the data pull.
Like all the other lectures in this class,
we're gonna contrast between idealized
settings, and what happens in real life.
In real life, data can be very messy.
And when we talk about the data pull,
we're talking about all the different
components that go into going from a raw
form of data into an analytic data set.
So in this process, some of these
steps are almost always required.
You almost always have to pull
an analytic data set from a larger more
complex data source.
You often have to merge disparate sorts
of data causing matching errors and
things like that.
Often, we have to summarize complex data
types, so for example, you might have
recorded voice data or text data that you
need to convert into meaningful summaries.
In my personal area that I work in,
often we're working with large
complex brain imaging data and
we have to summarize that down into
a handful of numbers that represent
certain regions of the brain for example.
Another very common problem is going
from data that is convenient for
one purpose into a convenient form for
analysis.
So for example the way we
might store the data for
archival purposes is generally not
what's right for analysis purposes.
So in the process of converting
there can always be errors.
So as a manager you're not
going to actually probably
execute any of these solutions.
Maybe you did that in your past, but
now you're managing groups of people or
individuals that are doing this for you.
So in this lecture, we're gonna give you
some simple tools that you can do to help
ensure data quality in real life when you
have these kind of messy data issues.
In researching this lecture, I noticed
that there were a lot of tools for
the practitioners, for the people that are
actually going to be doing the merging and
doing the actual data manipulations.
But relatively few for managers, so
that's what we're gonna focus on here.
The first thing I'd like to mention is the
simple act of creating what I like to call
Table 1.
And this is, these are basically
just summary tables and
these are a great way to catch errors.
And in Epi and Biostatistics
we call these tables Table 1.
And the reason we do that is because
whenever you write an Epi or
a biostatistics paper there's
always a first table that's
main purpose is just to summarize
demographic information in your sample.
So this is a great way to catch errors.
But a couple of caveats.
Get standard deviations along with means,
medians and quantiles,
the standard deviations will
often help you catch errors.
Another thing, another important one, and
I'll give an anecdote about this
in a minute, is check your units.
And I'll give an anecdote just to
remind exactly what I mean by that.
And then the other important thing I would
say is, usually, you're meeting about
these data tables maybe weekly,
maybe monthly, but keep the old ones and
always refer back to them cuz even subtle
changes in these Table 1's can often
highlight important meaningful changes,
an errant record or something like that.
If means that are usually quite stable
jump up from one report to the next
that's often valuable information.
So now I'm gonna go over this
example that I eluded to earlier.
In this example we were studying
brain volume as it related to
people who are chronically
exposed to lead.
They worked in a chemical
manufacturing plant back when
they were adding lead to paint and
gasoline and that sort of thing.
We we're interested in people's
longitudinal change in brain volumes over
time and when we started creating our
Table 1's, we weren't keeping track of
our units and it wasn't until
much later on in the process,
thankfully well before we
had finished the paper.
But it wasn't until pretty
long in the process,
before we realized we weren't
keeping track of our units.
And that people's brains were declining
at a rate that was way too fast
to be reasonable.
They were going from the size of
a house to the size of a pea, for
example, too quickly.
That was only because we hadn't
kept good track of our units.
But once when we had a very helpful
discussion about what the units were, and
then because of that discussion
on what the units were,
we went on a long literature review
on standard rates of brain decline in
healthy adults,
this really helped inform the paper.
But more than anything,
it also helped us with data quality,
since we realized that there were some
errant measurements driving up results.
So, a second tool at your disposal
after the modeling stage just like
we had the table one which we usually
conduct before we do any modeling.
After you've done some
regression modeling,
regression diagnostics are an extremely
useful way to detect data errors.
And my favorite examples of regression
diagnostics are from Len Stefansky,
who's at North Carolina State.
And if you look at this data set on
the left, it actually goes on for
a while after that.
If you were to look at it and
do some basic scatter plots,
you would see nothing out of
the ordinary in the data.
It would just look kind of like noise.
However if you do a residual plot,
which is plotting the errors
of the fitted values of the Russian model
versus the actual observed outcome values,
versus the predicted, you see this
crazy plot with Homer Simpsons on it.
And this is his way of showing
how residual plots can highlight
hidden systematic patterns in our data.
Okay, so residual plots are always
a good thing to look at and
always a good thing to look at for
systematic patterns, errant observations,
outliers, and those sorts of things.
Of course, these always occur
after you've done your modeling.
You have to have a model in
order to look at a residual.
So let me give you some definitions of
some of the things you might want to look
at especially from regression modeling
which is my favorite kind of modeling.
So residuals, like I just said, these
are the difference between the response,
the outcome that you're studying and
the fitted value,
what your model predicts it would be.
So, what you wanna look for
in residual plots, you just wanna make
sure that there aren't any systematic
patterns and you wanna look for extremely
large values that are well outside
the general pattern of the residuals.
There's another quantity called the hat
values, and they consider how variable
a data row of explanatory variable is
among its space of fellow predictors.
So all hat values are going to tell
you is simply how outside of the norm,
the normal range of variability,
this particular row of data is
relative to all it's other colleagues.
So, the DF fits, DF betas, and
Cook's distance, these are all measures of
things that are kind of related,
sort of like cross validation.
And in all these cases what you do is you
fit the model with the point deleted,
and then you fit the model
with that point included.
With a row of your data entirely deleted,
and then with that row included, okay?
And then you look at how
much your results changed
by virtue of leaving that row in or out.
And if you compare the fitted values.
And you get what are called the DF fits.
If you compare the slope estimates then
you get what are called the DF betas.
And if you compare the slope estimates
aggregated into one single number,
one single metric,
that's called Cook's distance.
But all of these are influence measures.
All they're trying to do is tell
you how much did things change
when I deleted this data
point from my model fitting.
That's also the same logic
among the PRESS residuals,
which are just residuals of the same sort.
How big was the residual for
this data point if I left
it in versus I left it out?
And these are often called leave one out
residuals or cross validated residuals but
all these things are useful and your
analyst or whoever you are working with.
You should work with them so
that they produce these kinds of residuals
diagnostic plots with your regression.
Not only do they help you evaluate
things about your regression model but
they help you evaluate things about
airing data points outlying observation.
And then you can drill down and
see what went wrong to have
those specific observations to have
such a large impact on the model fit for
example, or to be so
outside of the norm of all their peers.
Another kind of interesting,
in my mind fascinating
way to consider data quality
is to use Benford's law.
And Benford's law is the so
called First-Digit Law.
And I just mentioned here, you can read up
on it and sometimes people find it useful.
And it's so called phenomenological law
about the frequency distribution of
leading digits In many but
of course not all real live sets of data.
And so what this means, what Benford's Law
says, is if you look at the final digit,
say for example telephone numbers,
they don't follow a uniform distribution.
They follow a distribution that
looks something like this.
And you can try it,
try some Benford Laws experiment.
And it's basically saying that the numbers
should be uniform on a log scale
rather than on the natural scale.
So what you can do in terms of
data quality sometimes is if your
phenomenon that you're studying.
Whatever outcome that you're studying,
if it's digits should follow
Benford's law if you've checked in
the past then you can do it again and
see if there was some systematic errors
causing the distribution of your
the distribution of your points,
not to follow this law.
Again, this only is applicable when
the digits should follow Benford's Law.
As an example, if you're looking at
a particular city, the first digit,
the leftmost digit of telephone numbers,
isn't gonna
follow Benford's Laws because it's
going to be related to the area codes.
But the rightmost digit it does
tend to follow Benford's Law.
So at any rate, it's a little
subtle tool that you can use for
assessing a systematic data quality error
that's perturbing the distribution
of the digits of your data.
The final thing you might want to
try is actually checking specific
rows of your data through so-called
data quality queries, DQQs.
Of course you can't check every single
point because that's usually too
time-consuming.
However, you can check some.
And you can use statistical procedures
like random sampling to get a random
sample of rows of your data, check those
rows individually, and because it's a nice
random sample, you can get an estimate of
the proportion of bad rows in your data.
Okay, so
you can use statistics to sample and
understand how good or bad in general your
dataset is from a relatively small
sample that you check by hand, okay?
So these are some simple techniques
that you can help to try and
stay on top of the real life circumstance
where your data is actually a messy,
mishmash of merging errors and
that sort of thing.
Since we all know that the true idealized
setting doesn't occur in real life ever.